UNDERSTANDING MENTAL HEALTH
WHAT IS MENTAL HEALTH?
Our mental health directly influences how we think, feel and act: it also affects our physical health. Work, in fact, is actually one of
the best things for protecting our mental health, but it can also adversely affect it.
Good mental health and well-being is not an on-off
experience. We can all have days, weeks or months
where we feel resilient, strong and optimistic,
regardless of events or situations. Often that can
be mixed with or shift to a very different set of
thoughts, feelings and behaviours; or not feeling
resilient and optimistic in just one or two areas of
our life. For about twenty-five per cent of us, that
may shift to having a significant impact on how
we think, feel and act in many parts of our lives,
including relationships, experiences at work, sense
of connection to peer groups and our personal sense
of worth, physical health and motivation. This could
lead to us developing a mental health condition such
as anxiety, depression, substance misuse.
Mental health is a positive concept related to the
social and emotional wellbeing of people and
communities.
The concept relates to the enjoyment of life, ability
to cope with stress and sadness, the fulfilment of
goals and potential, and a sense of connection to
others. Mental health is about wellness rather than
illness and is not merely the absence of a mental
health condition.
Like physical health, mental health is not fixed.
Mental health exists on a continuum, or range:
from positive, healthy functioning at one end
through to severe symptoms of mental health
conditions at the other.
A person’s mental health moves back and forth along this range during
their lifetime, in response to different stressors and circumstances. At
the green end of the continuum, people are well; showing resilience
and high levels of wellbeing. Moving into the yellow area, people
may start to have difficulty coping. In the orange area, people have
more difficulty coping and symptoms may increase in severity and
frequency. At the red end of the continuum, people are likely to be
experiencing severe symptoms and may be at risk of self-harm or
suicide.
Risk factors and protective factors influence mental health and can
nudge people back and forth along the continuum. They can be
individual or related to family, work or other life circumstances.
Risk factors may increase the strain on our mental health, while
protective factors can counteract these by helping us to stay or
become well. With much of people’s time each day spent at work, the
workplace is a very influential environment when it comes to mental
health and wellbeing. A positive and supportive workplace can mean
the difference between being ‘in the green’ or ‘in the orange’.
(Source Beyondblue).
Positive, healthy
functioning
Severe impact on everyday
functioning
COMMON MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS
The purpose of this information is to give you greater understanding
of these issues. If you are concerned about yourself or a colleague,
professional assistance is recommended.
Remember, it is not your job to diagnose yourself
or someone else.
Visit these videos on:
ANXIETY
DEPRESSION
SUBSTANCE MISUSE
REACTIONS TO CRITICAL INCIDENTS AND TRAUMA
THE LANGUAGE WE USE
• can include or exclude someone and says a lot about our own approach to and inclusion of mental illness.
• What words and phrases have you heard?
• What words and phrases have you used?
• Please take a few moments to write them down and then read the table below to learn about the impact of words and how to use
different words to be more inclusive.
• What will you use next time you speak about mental health conditions?
ISSUE PROBLEMATIC PREFERRED
Certain language sensationalises
mental ill-health and reinforces
stigma
Terms such as ‘mental patient’,
‘nutter’, ‘lunatic’, ‘psycho’, ‘schizo’,
‘deranged’, ‘mad’
A person is ‘living with’ or ‘has a
diagnosis of’ a mental illness
Terminology that suggests a lack of
quality of life for people with mental
ill-health
Referring to someone with a mental
illness as a ‘victim’, ‘suffering from’ or
‘afflicted with’ a mental illness
A person is ‘being treated for’ or
‘someone with’ a mental illness
Labelling a person by their mental
illness
A person is a 'schizophrenic', 'an
anorexic'
A person ‘has a diagnosis of’ or ‘is
being treated for’ schizophrenia.
Descriptions of behaviour that imply
existence of mental ill-health or are
inaccurate
Using words such as ‘crazed’,
‘deranged’, ‘mad’, ‘psychotic’
The person's behaviour was unusual
or erratic
ISSUE PROBLEMATIC PREFERRED
Colloquialisms about treatment can
undermine people’s willingness to
seek help
Using words such as ‘happy pills’,
‘shrinks’, ‘mental institution’
Accurate terminology for treatments
e.g. antidepressants, psychiatrists or
psychologists, mental health hospital
Terminology used out of context adds
to misunderstanding and trivialises
mental ill-health
Terms like ‘psychotic dog’, using
‘schizophrenic’ to denote duality such
as ‘schizophrenic economy’
Reword any sentence that uses
psychiatric or medical terminology
incorrectly or out of context
(Source: Time-to-change)
For more information:
https://www.time-to-change.org.uk/media-centre/responsible-reporting/mind-your-language
https://mindframe.org.au/mental-health/communicating-about-mental-ill-health
WORKPLACE MENTAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING STRATEGY
www.un.org/en/healthy-workforce

